.Dd July 2, 2026
.Dt GLYPHIDE 1
.Os Linux
.Sh NAME
.Nm glyphide
.Nd graphical+text IDE for the Glyph programming language
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Ar file.glyph
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm glyphide
is a lightweight X11-based code editor for the Glyph programming language.
It provides syntax highlighting, shape preview, code execution, and linting
in a single binary.
.Pp
The IDE follows the language's philosophy: every block shape
.Pq Sq [ Ns squire Ns , Sq ( Ns loop Ns , Sq < Ns guard Ns , Sq { Ns trigger Ns
is colored differently, making the program's structure visible at a glance.
.Sh FEATURES
.Bl -tag -width "xxxx"
.It Code editor
Full text editing with auto-indentation, line numbers, and cursor movement.
.It Shape-aware syntax highlighting
Each block type (squire, loop, guard, trigger) gets a distinct color.
.It Shape preview panel
Visual panel showing block structure as colored boxes.
.It Run button
Execute the current code with the glyph interpreter.
.It Lint integration
Run the glyph linter on the current code.
.It File operations
Open, save, and create new files.
.El
.Sh KEYBOARD SHORTCUTS
.Bl -tag -width "xxxx"
.It Ctrl+R
Run the current code.
.It Ctrl+S
Save the file.
.It Ctrl+O
Open a file.
.It Ctrl+Q
Quit the IDE.
.It Esc
Close the output panel.
.It Arrow keys
Move the cursor.
.It Page Up/Down
Scroll by page.
.It Home/End
Move to start/end of line.
.It Enter
Insert newline with auto-indentation.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Start the IDE with a file:
.Dl $ glyphide hello.glyph
.Pp
Start with a new file:
.Dl $ glyphide
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr glyph 1
.br
The full IDE documentation is at
.Pa /usr/local/share/doc/glyph/ide.md .
.Sh AUTHORS
Glyph IDE v0.1.0 \(em built with C and X11.
